#Top internet languages: Global trends and prospects

##Summary
This visualization explores the change in the top 10 list of languages ranked by total internet users.

This project began with an earlier assignment in the Data Visualization Course, my critique of the flawed infographic at http://thenextweb.com/asia/2010/12/21/chinese-the-new-dominant-language-of-the-internet-infographic/ and proposed improvement (a slopegraph created with ggplot in R - https://docs.google.com/document/d/1CsqoSYbgbGW3_EnFQitaTLtjze5mG-aL0Ifib8ch-uQ/edit?usp=sharing).

Five years have passed since Google's Eric Schmidt, The Next Web, and others made predictions that China will become the number one language on hte internet. Five years have passed, and I decided to reexamine the data and consider what the future holds for languages on the internet.

My work-in-progres article on the topic can be found at https://docs.google.com/document/d/1CsqoSYbgbGW3_EnFQitaTLtjze5mG-aL0Ifib8ch-uQ/edit?usp=sharing

##Design
It was a definite challenge to make the visualization clear without being overwhelming.

My initial intention was to use flag images instead of pills for each of the languages, but that made labeling difficult and the chart too graphically complex. At first, I tried positioning labels to the left or to the right of the graph, but that wouldn't work for langauges that do not remain in the top ranking across the timeframe.

In the end, I settled for labels embedded within the pills, and only in the year the languages is present in the ranking. Adding labels both to the first and to the last pill in the series added clarity but made the chart extremely overwhelming to read.

I replaced flags with single colours, but it took a quite some time to find colours that would at once represent the individual languages, and not be too similar to be useful.

At the beginning, I placed the ranking numbers (1-11) in the right column besides the graph, but later replaced it with the % share of the language as I found it to be much more useful to the reader.

When I started to add animations to the chart, I first tried the obvious, and animate the chart in one year after the other. This worked, but did not feel right, becasue it did not tell teh true story behind the date. After all, what's interesting is not so much the relative ranking year after year, but the change in ranking of each individual langauge over time!

So, I went back to the drawing board, and in the end animated the chart language by language instead, letting the reader meditate for a few second on each language in isolation, before being thrown into free-to-play mode, hopefully with enough questions generated by then for the reader to be motivated to explore it in more detail on their own.

##Feedback
N/A

##Resources
http://junkcharts.typepad.com/junk_charts/bumps_chart/
http://roadtolarissa.com/stacked-bump/
http://www.storytellingwithdata.com/blog/2014/03/more-on-slopegraphs

I based my visualization off the MIT-licensed d3.js bumps chart implementation by Jim Vallandingham (https://bocoup.com/weblog/vintage-visualization-restoration-bump-chart/), but simplified and modified it extensively to suit the needs of this project.