#Top internet languages: Global trends and prospects

##Summary
This visualization explores the change in the top 10 list of languages ranked by total internet users.

This project began with an earlier assignment in the Data Visualization Course, my critique of the flawed infographic at http://thenextweb.com/asia/2010/12/21/chinese-the-new-dominant-language-of-the-internet-infographic/ and proposed improvement (a slopegraph created with ggplot in R - https://docs.google.com/document/d/1CsqoSYbgbGW3_EnFQitaTLtjze5mG-aL0Ifib8ch-uQ/edit?usp=sharing).

How have the dominant languages on the internet changed over the last decade? My exploratory analysis showed that European languages, Japanese and Korean, which dominated in the earlier days of the internet, have seen a rapid decline. Instead, they have been replaced by languages of highly populated developing countris, such as Portuguese, Arabic and Malay, as internet penetration improved in these regions.  

My work-in-progress article on the topic can be found at https://docs.google.com/document/d/1CsqoSYbgbGW3_EnFQitaTLtjze5mG-aL0Ifib8ch-uQ/edit?usp=sharing

##Design
It was a definite challenge to make the visualization clear without being overwhelming.

My initial intention was to use flag images instead of pills for each of the languages, but that made labelling difficult and the chart too graphically complex. At first, I tried positioning labels to the left or to the right of the graph, but that wouldn't work for languages that do not remain in the top ranking across the time-frame.

In the end, I settled for labels embedded within the pills, and only in the year the languages is present in the ranking. Adding labels both to the first and to the last pill in the series added clarity but made the chart extremely overwhelming to read.

I replaced flags with single colours, but it took a quite some time to find colours that would at once represent the individual languages, and not be too similar to be useful.

At the beginning, I placed the ranking numbers (1-11) in the right column besides the graph, but later replaced it with the % share of the language as I found it to be much more useful to the reader.

When I started to add animations to the chart, I first tried the obvious, and animate the chart in one year after the other. This worked, but did not feel right, because it did not tell the true story behind the date. After all, what's interesting is not so much the relative ranking year after year, but the change in ranking of each individual language over time!

So, I went back to the drawing board, and in the end animated the chart language by language instead, letting the reader meditate for a few second on each language in isolation, before being thrown into free-to-play mode, hopefully with enough questions generated by then for the reader to be motivated to explore it in more detail on their own.

Although this was an improvement over the original, feedback from my Udacity reviewer showed that there is still major room for improvement. I therefore once again started from scratch, and though about the overarching story I am tyring to tell: That languages of developed countries have seen a decline as those of populated developing countries took their spots. I changed the animation to better show this progression, and added a textual commentary to better present the narrative to the viewer.

##Feedback
I started with a sketch of a slopegraph, and a subsequent mockup in R, using ggplot (code and images are in the mockups folder).

I shared these with my friends and the feedback I received indicated that this format is good but not ideal for the purpose of this project:

"All the languages at the bottom are mushed together, it's difficult to tell them apart."

"Maybe add more colour. Like red for Chinese on your image is good, but could be the same for other langs."

From my conversations about my mockup in particular, I also noticed that some of my friend took for a given that, for example, Spanish and French switched rank exactly in the year where the two lines cross. This is of course not true as my dataset only includes information on 2005, 2010, and 2015. That is, the slopegraph appeared to them to show details which is not present in the dataset.

Although the nuanced change in growth of some languages can be interesting (I discuss it in more detail, and with additional graphs, in my article expanding on this visualization), what matters most to most people is the change in the relative *rank* of these languages. After all, for better or for worse, the question on everyone's mind is not whether the Chinese language is growing in importance, but whether it will eventually displace English as the lingua franca.

The slopegraph did not indicate the change in rank with the power worthy of this question, and I therefore changed the format to use a bumps chart with large, colourful pills for each language. Together with the animation, this presentation resonated better with the readers, the loss or gain in rank of each language now being as clear as it would have been on charts commonly seen in football and other sports.

This sacrificed some nuance and the chart no longer clearly shows the huge jump from English/Chinese and the rest of the languages, but what the chart does show (the rank), it represents with much more clarity and impact. No longer is there illusion of false detail in the crossing in the links between individual years. No longer are smaller languages all scrambled together.

As discussed above, my initial implementation animated the graph in year by year. After showing it to my friends, who found it more of a nuisance than a feature, I realized that this might not be the right approach:

"Why is it not load all at once at the beginning? it's so slow." 

The issue, it turns out, was not the speed of the animation, but the fact that the animation did not tell the right story, or any story for that matter. I eventually changed the animation to progress language by language instead, and in fact made it *slower*, yet the complaints went away a reason appeared for my friends to stay through to the end of the animation.

Nevertheless, comments from my Udacity reviewer clearly showed that the storyline still wasn't clear enough.

"Currently, this chart is exploratory rather than explanatory. It's exploratory because the viewer is presented with all of the data, and the viewer can explore around and try to make conclusions about the data for himself. For this chart to be explanatory, you as chart maker need to tell a story about the data. You need to find something interesting and force the viewer to see what it was that you found interesting about the chart.

In your visualization it is represented the evolution of the different internet languages for the 2005 to 2015 period, this allows viewers to explore the different language trends, but there seems not to be a clear story around it."

This led me to a complete revamp of the initial animation, and the addition of a textual commentary to complement it. I ran the new animation by a few of my friends, asking "What do you think is the main takeaway from this visualization?", as was suggested by my reviewer. The answers this time were more encouraging:

"Third world countries are taking over the internet"

"More content will be in Arabic and such than European languages."

After further helpful comments from a Udacity reviewer, I then clarified the titles so that it is clear that the visualization represents the share of internet users by language spoken, rather than the share of content in particular languages (although the former is often used to estimate the latter). I also added an additional title explaining that some of the languages have dropped off the ranking altogether.

My Udacity reviewer also inquired as to the reason why the ranking shows 11, rather than the traditional 10 items. This is the case because it is a ranking of top 10 languages + an one additional item for all "other" languages. This was a choice made by the original data source, WIS, and I tend to agree with it because "other" is not a single language (just as in some rankings "European Union" might have a rank of its own, alongside the individual EU countries). This is also the reason why "other" languages are presented in gray colour, as to differentiate them from the rest.

##Resources
Data source:
http://www.internetworldstats.com/stats7.htm

Learning more about slopegraphs & bumps charts:
http://junkcharts.typepad.com/junk_charts/bumps_chart/
http://roadtolarissa.com/stacked-bump/
http://www.storytellingwithdata.com/blog/2014/03/more-on-slopegraphs

I based my visualization off the MIT-licensed d3.js bumps chart implementation by Jim Vallandingham (https://bocoup.com/weblog/vintage-visualization-restoration-bump-chart/), but simplified and modified it extensively to suit the needs of this project.